specs/keystone/backlog/alembic.rst, before:

..
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported
 License.

 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode

==================
Alembic Migrations
==================

`bp alembic <https://blueprints.launchpad.net/keystone/+spec/alembic>`_


Move from SQLALChemy-migrate to Alembic as the tool for maintaining SQL Repos.


Problem Description
===================

OpenStack is moving from sqlalchemy-migrate to Alembic as the tool for
maintaining SQL migrations. Keystone needs to follow suit, or we will be using
an unsupported tool.

Proposed Change
===============

Continue using sqlalchemy-migrate for the current set of migrations.
All new migrations will use Alembic.

Alembic migrations will run after sqlachemy-migrate migrations on upgrade
and vice versa on downgrade. oslo.db's migration_cli utilities will be used.

In two releases, we should be able to collapse the last of the
sqlalchemy-migrate based migrations into a base Alembic based migration.

Security Impact
---------------

None

Notifications Impact
--------------------

None

Other End User Impact
---------------------

None

Performance Impact
------------------

None

Other Deployer Impact
---------------------

None

Developer Impact
----------------

Existing modules that need migrations will need to create an "alembic"
directory along with "migrate_repo". It can be done using
``alembic init alembic`` command in the directory with the module.

Implementation
==============

Assignee(s)
-----------


Primary assignee:

  Boris Bobrov (breton)

Other contributors:
  ayoung

Work Items
----------

* Start using migration_cli from oslo.db with disabled Alembic

* Create Alembic repos where sqlalchemy-migrate is now used, add a requirement
  to have Alembic repos if migrations are required and remove a requirement to
  have a "repo_migrate".

Dependencies
============

The feature requires to have a new dependency for Keystone -- "Alembic". Now
Alembic is required anyway by oslo.db, which is a requirement for Keystone.

Documentation Impact
====================

* Describe how to create migrations with Alembic

References
==========

* https://alembic.readthedocs.org/en/latest/tutorial.html#creating-an-environment
  for extension authors

* http://lists.openstack.org/pipermail/openstack-dev/2013-July/011767.html

* https://review.openstack.org/gitweb?p=openstack/oslo.db.git;a=blob;f=oslo/db/sqlalchemy/migration_cli/README.rst;h=ebbbdcbe3ab65da35a3322fec30767e60a840060;hb=HEAD

Commit message:

Clarify bits of the alembic backlogged spec
We discussed the need for this spec in the keystone meeting after the
Pike PTG:

  http://eavesdrop.openstack.org/meetings/keystone/2017/keystone.2017-02-28-18.00.log.html#l-203

The requirement for implementing this specification has a hard
dependency on supporting the OpenStack sqlalchemy-migrate fork. If
that support ever goes away, we'll *have* to move forward with this
approach.

This commit updates the spec to reflect those changes such that new
developers and people who reference our backlog for project direction
are aware and informed.

Change-Id: Ic44d28943512f9a26452bb2b98c62f656d2ea859

specs/keystone/backlog/alembic.rst, after:

..
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported
 License.

 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode

==================
Alembic Migrations
==================

`bp alembic <https://blueprints.launchpad.net/keystone/+spec/alembic>`_


Move from SQLALChemy-migrate to Alembic as the tool for maintaining SQL Repos.


Problem Description
===================


The OpenStack community is gradually moving away from using sqlalchemy-migrate
in favor of Alembic. In order to allow various projects within the community
time to make the switch, OpenStack is maintaining a fork of `sqlalchemy-migrate
<https://github.com/openstack/sqlalchemy-migrate>`_.  Keystone needs to follow
suit, or we will be using an unsupported tool.

Proposed Change
===============

Continue using sqlalchemy-migrate for the current set of migrations.
All new migrations will use Alembic.

Alembic migrations will run after sqlachemy-migrate migrations on upgrade
and vice versa on downgrade. oslo.db's migration_cli utilities will be used.

In two releases, we should be able to collapse the last of the
sqlalchemy-migrate based migrations into a base Alembic based migration.

Security Impact
---------------

None

Notifications Impact
--------------------

None

Other End User Impact
---------------------

None

Performance Impact
------------------

None

Other Deployer Impact
---------------------

None

Developer Impact
----------------

Existing modules that need migrations will need to create an "alembic"
directory along with "migrate_repo". It can be done using
``alembic init alembic`` command in the directory with the module.

Implementation
==============

Assignee(s)
-----------


Primary assignee:
  None

Other contributors:
  None

Work Items
----------

* Start using migration_cli from oslo.db with disabled Alembic

* Create Alembic repos where sqlalchemy-migrate is now used, add a requirement
  to have Alembic repos if migrations are required and remove a requirement to
  have a "repo_migrate".

Dependencies
============

The feature requires to have a new dependency for Keystone -- "Alembic". Now
Alembic is required anyway by oslo.db, which is a requirement for Keystone.

Documentation Impact
====================

* Describe how to create migrations with Alembic

References
==========

* https://alembic.readthedocs.org/en/latest/tutorial.html#creating-an-environment
  for extension authors

* http://lists.openstack.org/pipermail/openstack-dev/2013-July/011767.html

* https://review.openstack.org/gitweb?p=openstack/oslo.db.git;a=blob;f=oslo/db/sqlalchemy/migration_cli/README.rst;h=ebbbdcbe3ab65da35a3322fec30767e60a840060;hb=HEAD
